The State of Data
Bipin C. Desai
Concordia University
Montreal, QC, H3G 1M8
Canada
1 514 848 2424
BipinC.Desai@concordia.ca

Abstract
We are currently experiencing an extraordinary acceleration in the
growth rate of digital data. One of the reasons for this increase is
the digitization of virtually all communications and records. This
exponential growth is evidenced by the fact that the sum total of
data produced in the last year or two would exceed all data that
existed in digital form prior to that time. Just as the Industrial
Revolution created an entirely new urban way of life for what is
now more than half of the population of the planet, the Big Data
revolution will dramatically alter the ways in which we interact,
not only with each other but with all of the institutions which
mediate our lives. Our age has come to be known as the era of Big
Data and we are only beginning to understand its opportunities
and challenges. This position paper underlines some of these
emerging promises and threats, as well as their implications for
researchers and scientists across the database community.

Categories and Subject Descriptors
K.4.1 [Public Policy Issues]
privacy,
regulation,
transborder data flow, use/abuse of
General Terms
Design, Economics, Reliability, Experimentation, Security,
Human Factors, Legal Aspects.

Keywords
data, Big Data, data mining, privacy, security, social media and
networking, search engines

1. Introduction
Our time has come to be known as the age of Big Data [1]. As
with the birth of any new era, the inception of this new age is of
major cultural, scientific, political and economic significance. It is
this cultural or anthropological element that renders a reflection
on digital computing necessary, not only for the specialist but also
for the (now largely wirelessly) wired world as such. This cultural
milestone is, however, of particular interest to engineers insofar as
this revolution, like many of those that preceded it, has been made
possible by, among other important elements, the no doubt
essential ingredient of their ingenuity.

Therefore, in order to understand this new age in terms of some of
its origins, it is useful to briefly recall the history of data storage
From here on, this paper will examine more closely some specific
consequences of this new age which bear most directly on the
theory and practice of the data engineer, namely, the proliferation
of data and the novel possibilities it affords.

2. How Data Got Big

Though humans have recorded data in various forms over many
centuries such recording has, until recently, been stored in an
analog format [2]. With the invention of the magnetic tape in the
mid 1940s, the recording of and manipulation of data became
possible since it allowed for the storing of analog and later digital
data accessible in sequential mode. Magnetic tape was followed
by magnetic drums and thence by magnetic disks with greater and
greater data storage capacity and faster and faster access time.
These devices made it possible to access vast swathes of data in
random order, hence allowing storing, accessing and processing of
larger and larger amounts of data.

The electro-mechanical digital computers which started appearing
around late 1930’s were quickly replaced by electronic devices
with integrated circuits. Increased density of the circuitry was
achieved by higher and higher levels of miniaturization and
integration resulting in faster and smaller digital computer.
[http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Computer] This set the stage for
today’s concentration of processing power and data, making it
possible to quickly process immense amounts of data gathered
from multiple sources, the so-called Big Data, in a fraction of a
second and derive interesting results.

Over the past half century database technologies have continued
to evolve, from the first one reported to be IDS released by GE
running on GE235 computers [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/
Database]. Along with the advances in hardware, a number of data
models have been developed. The first was the hierarchical model
with IBM’s IMS, most prominently and widely used in the 1960s
and beyond. The network model was proposed as a replacement,
followed by the relational model, which, though it appeared in
1970s, was slow to catch on, becoming dominant only in the last
decade of the twentieth century. It is now the most common
model for new applications. The object model which was
introduced in the 80s has not caught on for database application.
Instead, the use of the object-relation model has bridged the
mismatch between many existing application using the relational
model and new needs where the object model is desired.
However, the genesis of Big Data truly began with the evolution
of the world wide web, which at its inception, was only one
application of the internet among many. It is with the widespread
adoption of the web that web-based applications began to
proliferate, and it is principally these that have, in just over a
decade, created the avalanche of data which is driving current
economic and social phenomena and the novel issues which
surround them.
